All right.
NOTE CONF
Good afternoon.
So it's time to start doing a bit of computation.
NOTE CONF
We call this section Computation and logic.
But we've been giving you logic for eight weeks.
NOTE CONF
So it's about time we did some computation.
And what we're going to talk about for the next
NOTE CONF
couple of weeks is the simplest model of computation that
we can still do useful things with.
NOTE CONF
Who is today's photo?
This is Stephen Carlini.
NOTE CONF
Very remarkable man.
Not actually a computer scientist.
NOTE CONF
He is responsible for quite a number of fundamental early
computer science results, including some of the work that we're
NOTE CONF
talking about in these two weeks.
But mostly he's known for his work in set theory.
NOTE CONF
Now, you may remember there were another couple of set
theorists occurring earlier when we were talking about dplyr.
NOTE CONF
So there's some strange connection between very difficult set theory
and quite simple computer science.
NOTE CONF
So what am I talking about?
What is computation?
NOTE CONF
You have ideas about what computation is.
You possibly have not very well formed ideas because it's
NOTE CONF
been part of your life ever since you were in
a position to think about what anything was.
NOTE CONF
And I want therefore to think about things that are
very simple, fairly physical level.
NOTE CONF
Try to imagine what the simplest notion of doing something
that is computing could be.
NOTE CONF
And we reckon that the easiest thing you can do
with computing is build a machine that just moves between
NOTE CONF
different states.
So, as usual, stuff in purple is a technical term
NOTE CONF
which is going to be defined and you will need
to have in your heads for the rest of it.
NOTE CONF
I should warn you that this section of the course
starts with some nice pictures and some fairly easy concepts,
NOTE CONF
and then we talk about doing a few proofs with
the stuff, and the notation looks a bit heavy, but
NOTE CONF
the notation looks much worse than it actually is, so
it's just a matter of keeping track of it.
NOTE CONF
So I want to build a machine.
It does stuff by moving between different states which represent
NOTE CONF
different stages of the computation.
And I'm going to assume that there are finitely many
NOTE CONF
states.
Any of you have an issue with that as an
NOTE CONF
assumption?
I mean, one can argue about it.
NOTE CONF
We will argue about it later.
But for the moment, let's just say we're trying to
NOTE CONF
keep things simple.
So we want a nice finite number of states that
NOTE CONF
we can even see.
Then what kind of computation is this going to do?
NOTE CONF
There were a bunch of choices I want to make
here.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to be thinking about machines which read some
input now because we're trying to do this formally.
NOTE CONF
Then I'm going to define the input to be a
symbol.
NOTE CONF
That might be a letter, it might be a number,
it might be a shape.
NOTE CONF
Who cares?
But it's a symbol which comes from a particular alphabet,
NOTE CONF
which might be the alphabet or might be 0 to
9, or it might be shapes or whatever.
NOTE CONF
So the machine is reading input that comes from the
outside world.
NOTE CONF
That can represent lots of things.
So it could represent input coming in from sensors, it
NOTE CONF
could represent people pressing buttons.
It could even represent video.
NOTE CONF
Who knows?
And then the question is what is the machine going
NOTE CONF
to do with the input?
Here there are a couple of fundamental distinctions.
NOTE CONF
One type of machine is concerned with classifying inputs as
good or bad.
NOTE CONF
So this is where we're trying to recognise whether, um,
for example, a particular English sentence is a good English
NOTE CONF
sentence or not.
Other kinds of machines are concerned with taking some input
NOTE CONF
and producing some output.
So an example.
NOTE CONF
There would be a translation machine which takes English and
puts out French.
NOTE CONF
Um, the differences between them are not all that important.
But for the theory we're going to do at this
NOTE CONF
stage, we're going to be thinking about machines which read
input and then give you just a yes or no
NOTE CONF
answer.
It's good input or it's bad input, rather than thinking
NOTE CONF
about machines that also produce output.
You'll do those in later courses.
NOTE CONF
And the other thing that we're going to assume is
that we know how to reboot the machine, or how
NOTE CONF
to boot the machine.
Um, if you've ever wondered about how computers know how
NOTE CONF
to start and you don't know, maybe find out, it's
actually a lot more interesting than it sounds.
NOTE CONF
So these are principles of simple computation.
We just move around between states.
NOTE CONF
You could think of these as lines of a program
if you wanted, or a finite number of states.
NOTE CONF
Is it me or are the lights dimming.
It's going to be one of those days.
NOTE CONF
Um, which state we move to is determined by some
stuff that the machine reads from the.
NOTE CONF
Input from the environment.
Can I be bothered to reset them?
NOTE CONF
Is it clear enough with these front lights on, or
shall I go back and try to return it to
NOTE CONF
my usual state?
Anybody care?
NOTE CONF
Nobody cares or nobody cares enough.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Some states are good, some states are bad, and we
read an input.
NOTE CONF
We end up in a state.
It's either a good state or a bad state, and
NOTE CONF
we know how to start.
So these things are if you make them a little
NOTE CONF
bit more formal by turning all this stuff into some
symbols, these are entities known by various names.
NOTE CONF
So one common name is a finite automata.
One of these is a finite automaton.
NOTE CONF
Another common name is finite state machines.
I am going to find it impossible to be consistent
NOTE CONF
about which one I use.
So whichever one I say, I mean the same thing.
NOTE CONF
Um, any questions about the definitions or any questions about
whether any of these assumptions seem unnaturally restrictive, even for
NOTE CONF
something simple.
Um, why do I introduce these things?
NOTE CONF
Well, they actually have an awful lot of applications because
a lot of the automation that goes on in our
NOTE CONF
current world, which is a lot more than in the
world when I was young, can still be viewed as
NOTE CONF
some kind of finite state diagram of things transitioning between
states.
NOTE CONF
So it happens in particular with things like simple systems,
washing machines, and modern washing.
NOTE CONF
Washing machines try to be quite fancy.
You are probably too young to have seen a washing
NOTE CONF
machine that claim to have fuzzy logic in it, but
sometime back in the 70s or 80s when computerisation was
NOTE CONF
first hitting white goods.
There were companies that tried to say, we do fuzzy
NOTE CONF
logic in our washing machines.
They don't say that anymore, but modern washing machines now
NOTE CONF
do a lot of sensing of the weight of the
load and the dryness of the load on the drying
NOTE CONF
cycle and so on.
Central heating is another very simple finite state thing your
NOTE CONF
central heating controller.
Those of you who have one only has a few
NOTE CONF
states, and it cycles between them according to inputs from
the clock, the thermostat, and so on.
NOTE CONF
Traffic lights.
Classic example.
NOTE CONF
Traffic lights are more complicated than they used to be
because they now sense the presence of traffic, but even
NOTE CONF
that is a simple finite state thing.
There's either a car waiting in front of the radar
NOTE CONF
or there isn't, but also many of the things we
need to do in order to write programs and run
NOTE CONF
your Haskell School programs can be done with finite state
machines.
NOTE CONF
Not all of them.
It depends on which part you're doing, but a fair
NOTE CONF
amount of programming language implementation uses finite automaton.
CPU controllers.
NOTE CONF
So what goes on in a computer?
Computer has a central processing unit which does most of
NOTE CONF
the main work.
That itself is divided into many parts, and there's a
NOTE CONF
core controller whose name I.
Now I forget because it's a long time since I
NOTE CONF
taught this stuff, which essentially directs the behaviour of all
the other parts of the CPU, such as the arithmetic
NOTE CONF
unit control unit.
I think that's the term we used.
NOTE CONF
So there are lots of bits inside a computer that
are in fact modelled as finite state machines.
NOTE CONF
Natural language processing is another.
We do a lot of natural language processing these days.
NOTE CONF
Parts of that are finite automata, manageable.
Which kind of raises the question.
NOTE CONF
Lots of you have laptops sitting in front of you.
Are they finite automata?
NOTE CONF
Anybody think their laptop is not a finite automaton?
Turing machine more powerful than autonomous?
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
Nobody thinks their laptop isn't a finite automaton who thinks
their laptop is a finite automaton.
NOTE CONF
Good.
How many of you think it's useful to think of
NOTE CONF
your laptop as a finite automaton?
Okay, most of the time it's not very useful, because
NOTE CONF
why is it finite?
Because you've only got however much memory you've got in
NOTE CONF
it.
I don't know how much memory you have in modern
NOTE CONF
laptops.
Um, I suppose the gamers have 64 gig and the
NOTE CONF
normal people have 16 gig.
Is that about right?
NOTE CONF
Yeah, well, that's a finite amount of memory and there's
a finite amount of disk space.
NOTE CONF
So there's a finite amount of everything.
So ultimately all computers are finite automata.
NOTE CONF
But it's not very useful to think of your laptop
as a finite automaton because you can't program it like
NOTE CONF
one.
You would go mad if you tried to understand a
NOTE CONF
laptop as something with how many states are two to
the power of two to the 64 gig, whatever.
NOTE CONF
So in principle, everything is a finite automaton, at least
assuming the universe is finite.
NOTE CONF
But in practice, it's not useful to think of real
computers as finite automata.
NOTE CONF
So we use them to do fundamental, basic things.
So how am I going to think about them?
NOTE CONF
We like pictures because we can understand pictures.
And actually the pictures Jazz are mostly quite a good
NOTE CONF
way of thinking about much of the stuff we're going
to do.
NOTE CONF
We will ask you to do some of the formal
stuff because somebody has to do it.
NOTE CONF
But I work with pictures quite a lot when I
do this stuff.
NOTE CONF
I mean, I don't do financial automata stuff, but I
do related things.
NOTE CONF
So it's helpful to have a standard notion of what
a picture of an automaton looks like.
NOTE CONF
And a very simple one looks like this.
What have I got in it?
NOTE CONF
I've got some circles and those are representing the different
states.
NOTE CONF
So the machine is going to move between these states.
And every state has a name.
NOTE CONF
So this state is named zero and this state is
named one.
NOTE CONF
Names can be anything.
They're just literally names.
NOTE CONF
So in this particular automaton there are two states and
the set of states which we will talk about from
NOTE CONF
time to time is zero.
And one.
NOTE CONF
I've drawn arrows between them.
These are the things that describe how the machine actually
NOTE CONF
computes.
How does it respond to input coming in from the
NOTE CONF
outside world?
So the arrow shows you what happens when a particular
NOTE CONF
input comes in.
This machine understands the inputs A and B.
NOTE CONF
So we usually use letters although.
So you can think of that as sensor inputs buttons
NOTE CONF
whatever.
And the way we read the arrow is for example,
NOTE CONF
that if you are in this state zero and the
outside world gives you the letter A, then you move
NOTE CONF
to state one.
If you're in state zero and the outside world gives
NOTE CONF
you the letter B, then you move to where you
are.
NOTE CONF
And there's a subtle distinction between moving to the same
place and doing nothing.
NOTE CONF
The reason we say we move to the same places
because we consume the input.
NOTE CONF
We get the input and use it up.
Um, what's the other thing I haven't mentioned?
NOTE CONF
The little short arrow at the beginning says, what is
the state that the machine starts in at the beginning
NOTE CONF
of computation?
That's where we are when we switch the thing on.
NOTE CONF
Um, what does this machine do?
So finite automata are generally designed to recognise that is,
NOTE CONF
say yes to certain input strings that you want to
select as being good input strings.
NOTE CONF
So can you stare at this diagram and not look
at the next line on the slide and decide what
NOTE CONF
it does?
So what does it do?
NOTE CONF
Well, it reads B's.
It will happily read B's forever.
NOTE CONF
If you get an A.
Then it will happily read BS forever and it will
NOTE CONF
happily read A's forever.
Um, so.
NOTE CONF
It wants to read an A, and then it reads
A's and B's, but I haven't yet told you whether
NOTE CONF
it's going to think things are good or bad.
It's just work through the behaviour.
NOTE CONF
We will use these diagrams a lot to understand more
complex constructions.
NOTE CONF
So again this is notation graphical notation.
If I take this machine which is starting off in
NOTE CONF
the initial state.
So I use green to mark the current state of
NOTE CONF
the machine.
What happens if I feed it the input a b.
NOTE CONF
So from the outside world we're getting an A followed
by a b.
NOTE CONF
Well the first thing we see is an A.
So we move to the right.
NOTE CONF
Getting there.
State changes to one, then a b fires.
NOTE CONF
I say fires, so this word is actually something I'm
used to using from a slightly different model of commutation.
NOTE CONF
People will talk about transitions firing.
They will talk about transitions happening.
NOTE CONF
Uh, choose your favourite verb.
Um, I use fire because I think if the input
NOTE CONF
is triggering the thing to happen.
Um, so what happens?
NOTE CONF
Be fires.
And we stay back to where we are, and the
NOTE CONF
state remains as it is.
And then after that, if we were to keep feeding
NOTE CONF
it more A's and B's, it would just stay where
it is.
NOTE CONF
But so far this is just reading input.
And it's not telling you whether the input is good
NOTE CONF
or bad.
So let's look at a slightly more complex automaton, which
NOTE CONF
has an idea of whether particular inputs are good or
bad.
NOTE CONF
Before I go on, any questions about the very basic
notation.
NOTE CONF
Is that all clear?
This one is a little bit more complex.
NOTE CONF
This has some things that are accepting states.
So I've written some states with double circles instead of
NOTE CONF
single circles.
These are the good states.
NOTE CONF
If at the end of the input we end up
in a state where the double circle, then that's a
NOTE CONF
good input.
Otherwise it's a bad input.
NOTE CONF
Um, so this is now slightly more complex.
Again, can you stare at it and see instantly what
NOTE CONF
it's fine to do?
Even with free states, it takes a bit of thought.
NOTE CONF
Um.
What does it do on various inputs?
NOTE CONF
So here's an input.
Baa baa baa.
NOTE CONF
And what happens?
We see the B.
NOTE CONF
We see the A, we see the B we see
the A, we see the A takes us back to
NOTE CONF
the beginning again.
So notice that many some inputs might take us back
NOTE CONF
to the beginning B again, again.
So we end up in this accepting state which is
NOTE CONF
good.
And we say that if the automaton reads a particular
NOTE CONF
input and ends up in an accepting state, a double
circle state, we say it has accepted that string.
NOTE CONF
Otherwise we say that it rejects the string.
So you should check for yourself that if you feed
NOTE CONF
it the string bar, it rejects it.
You should in fact verify that for yourself right now.
NOTE CONF
Do you all agree with that?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Good.
I always get worried at this stage because it's amazing
NOTE CONF
how long some mistakes survive in slides.
How can we describe the strings that it accepts.
NOTE CONF
So looking at it, can you describe what makes a
string a good string for this automaton?
NOTE CONF
I can see things so multiple.
You mean the number of.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So that answer was if the number of A's is
NOTE CONF
1 or 2 mod three.
That's why these are rather suggestive.
NOTE CONF
Names for states were chosen.
This is actually understood as zero mod three, one mod
NOTE CONF
three and two more three.
And it doesn't care about B's at all.
NOTE CONF
Because if you look at what happens to the B's,
then it just reads them in any state and does
NOTE CONF
nothing with them.
That requires some intelligence.
NOTE CONF
So realising that this automaton is counting mod three is
a non-trivial thing.
NOTE CONF
It's not obvious how to extract that immediately.
What happens if you try to do it?
NOTE CONF
The kind of less intelligent way, which is the way
I tend to look at things.
NOTE CONF
You end up trying to say things like, oh, well,
it reads any number of A's and then it reads
NOTE CONF
an A and any number of B's, and then optionally
it can read another A and any number of B's.
NOTE CONF
And then it can read two A's followed by everything
all over again.
NOTE CONF
And that's very confusing.
Um, it's much less clear than saying this thing counts
NOTE CONF
the number of A's modulo three.
But this kind of description does have the advantage that
NOTE CONF
it can be done by computers without using human intelligence.
So we are actually going to end up building this
NOTE CONF
kind of description of automata in obviously in a more
formal and symbolic way, but essentially like that.
NOTE CONF
And so that's what I'm going to do next week
or next week.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Next week.
NOTE CONF
Um, the rate I'm going possibly this week.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Any questions so far?
So I've introduced an automaton with states transitions between the
NOTE CONF
states.
It leads input.
NOTE CONF
Some states are good.
If an input is ends up in a good state,
NOTE CONF
then the input is accepted.
So this is all definitional stuff.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So far um, drawing pictures takes up a lot of
NOTE CONF
space.
And automata tend to get big and complicated.
NOTE CONF
So it is very helpful to have some ways to
save space when writing down automata.
NOTE CONF
So whilst we're still working on notation, I'm going to
introduce some more pictorial notation.
NOTE CONF
I've done that bit.
Here are some conventions that will let us save some
NOTE CONF
space.
This is an obvious one, right?
NOTE CONF
If I write b, comma, c or on an arrow.
What I really mean is that there's a b arrow
NOTE CONF
and a crow.
I just don't have to write the same arrow twice.
NOTE CONF
So here, for example, we see a state which where
the business part of it is reading a C and
NOTE CONF
going into a good state, and the rest of it
is reading A or B, the other letters and going
NOTE CONF
into this state.
In this state, it doesn't really care what the input
NOTE CONF
is.
It reads A, B, or C and just stays where
NOTE CONF
it is.
If you look at the state, you'll see that it
NOTE CONF
has no arrows going out of it except the one
that comes straight back into it.
NOTE CONF
So once you're here, you are stuck.
And for obvious reasons, we call that a black hole
NOTE CONF
state.
It is a place where the machine is stuck forever.
NOTE CONF
And typically machines have a lot of black hole states
because whenever anything goes badly wrong, you typically want the
NOTE CONF
machine basically to deadlock and stop giving.
And it's never going to give a useful answer, but
NOTE CONF
it may or may not want to consume input.
So we will adopt a convention called the Black Hole
NOTE CONF
Convention, which hopefully doesn't confuse any physicists.
And that says if we don't bother to write down
NOTE CONF
a transition letter at all, then we'll assume that it's
implicitly leading to some black hole state.
NOTE CONF
So if I have a state here and it doesn't
have say there's a letter D, I haven't written a
NOTE CONF
letter D implicitly, D goes to a black hole state.
And that state is always bad.
NOTE CONF
So black hole states are bad.
They're rejecting states.
NOTE CONF
So the result of adopting these conventions is that this
slightly messy thing can be more concisely written just like
NOTE CONF
that, because everything else, all these other inputs, lead straight
into the black hole state where we stay so we
NOTE CONF
can just pretend they don't exist.
It is quite important to note that this is a
NOTE CONF
convention.
This is not the real automaton we're looking at.
NOTE CONF
This is a convention saying the real automaton looks like
this, plus the black hole state.
NOTE CONF
So this is an automaton.
Get stuck there.
NOTE CONF
If there were no black hole state and you fed
this thing a B, what would it do?
NOTE CONF
It would get stuck there.
Because we are saying implicitly, there's a convention.
NOTE CONF
This thing will actually keep on reading for input forever.
Permanently stuck in the black hole state.
NOTE CONF
And at some later stages, it becomes useful to distinguish
between things that keep reading input, but are always in
NOTE CONF
a bad state and things that actually get stuck.
But for the moment, we're going to assume that things
NOTE CONF
always read input and it goes into a bad state.
Okay, so that is a lot of notation, although it's
NOTE CONF
mostly graphical notation and a couple of conventions which you
are going to have to keep in mind and experience
NOTE CONF
shows that some of you will forget this convention in
the course of the tutorial you're about to do.
NOTE CONF
So.
This is a reminder that it exists.
NOTE CONF
Any questions on these hopefully straightforward but detailed notations.
Okay, so now I'm going to mention something about the
NOTE CONF
automata I've been drawing that I haven't mentioned so far.
Do you think this is a sensible automaton?
NOTE CONF
No.
Anybody think it is?
NOTE CONF
I mean, what would it mean?
It's a hard to see what it means.
NOTE CONF
I've said in state zero, I read an A and
go to one, which is a good state.
NOTE CONF
And I've also said I read an A and go
to two, which is a bad state, which doesn't make
NOTE CONF
much sense.
Um, there are many things in computer science that are
NOTE CONF
useful, even though they don't make sense.
So next week we will see that such things can
NOTE CONF
be useful.
But for the moment, we're going to take a basic
NOTE CONF
and sensible view and say that things like this do
not make sense.
NOTE CONF
So this is the the characteristic of automata that I
haven't yet mentioned.
NOTE CONF
There's only one start state that sounds like a good
thing, because when you switch the thing on, you should
NOTE CONF
know where it is.
And if you're in a particular state, then there's exactly
NOTE CONF
one transition from the state for every input letter.
If you have the black hole convention, you might not
NOTE CONF
write some of them down, but there is exactly one
transition.
NOTE CONF
If you're in a state and a comes in, then
you know where you go.
NOTE CONF
These automata are called deterministic automata.
They're called deterministic because what they do, the next move
NOTE CONF
is completely determined by the input that comes from the
outside world.
NOTE CONF
As I said next week we will see that there
are uses for things that look like this.
NOTE CONF
There's no physical meaning for this, but that doesn't stop
us using it.
NOTE CONF
But for the moment we're thinking about trying to do
actual computation.
NOTE CONF
So we're going to assume that this is a property
of the kind of automaton that we're going to deal
NOTE CONF
with.
So formally deterministic finite automata.
NOTE CONF
I will probably say DFA because it's shorter.
So you need to remember that that's what a DFA
NOTE CONF
is.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So we've done this in pictures.
Mathematicians many mathematicians think in pictures but they don't tend
NOTE CONF
to write papers in pictures.
So we're going to introduce some symbolic notation that will
NOTE CONF
allow you to write down properties of finite automata and
prove things about finite automata.
NOTE CONF
We won't be expecting you to do much in the
way of proof, but we will show you some proofs
NOTE CONF
in the book and a little bit of proof here.
Um, you are beginning to come across the notion of
NOTE CONF
defining mathematical objects by writing down definitions.
So I think most of you haven't seen very much
NOTE CONF
of that in school.
I put a question into the CWL tutorial last week.
NOTE CONF
That was a quite severe introduction to defining mathematical objects
just by writing down the definition, and I reckon that
NOTE CONF
most of you decided you had better things to do
with your time, at least if my group was representative.
NOTE CONF
But this is actually what all mathematics and theory is
about.
NOTE CONF
You think of an object, you, and then you write
down a definition that tells you what that object is,
NOTE CONF
and then you try to prove things about it.
And hopefully those things you prove about it can then
NOTE CONF
be used to do constructive things with it later.
So here is a definition of dfas in a traditional
NOTE CONF
mathematical style.
And this is something that you only need to get
NOTE CONF
used to, at least for a bit later on as
well.
NOTE CONF
You cannot entirely escape this stuff in the course of
a computer science degree, although you can try quite hard.
NOTE CONF
So what is an automaton?
Well, it's a set of states.
NOTE CONF
I said that the set of states was finite.
Um, I want a name for the set of states.
NOTE CONF
There's a lot of tradition built into this.
It's traditional to use Q capital Q for the set
NOTE CONF
of states.
I can't remember why.
NOTE CONF
It's either a Latin word or a German word, but
I forget which.
NOTE CONF
Um, we have some input symbols, letters, numbers, buttons, whatever.
And again, it's traditional for reasons that I've also forgotten
NOTE CONF
to use the Greek letter sigma for the input alphabet.
I told you about seven weeks ago that you really
NOTE CONF
needed to learn your Greek alphabets, so this is a
reminder.
NOTE CONF
We don't have to use Greek letters, but the weight
of decades of history is too much to throw off.
NOTE CONF
Um, there's a transition function.
What's a transition function?
NOTE CONF
Transition function is an arrow.
Think about what an arrow is.
NOTE CONF
There are several ways you could think about what an
arrow is.
NOTE CONF
One way you might think about an arrow mathematically is
that it's a ternary relation.
NOTE CONF
So you might say an arrow has a source state
a label and a target state.
NOTE CONF
So therefore it is a triple of source label and
target.
NOTE CONF
We're not going to do that yet because we're working
in a nice deterministic world.
NOTE CONF
We know that if we have a particular source state
and a particular label, then there's only one target state.
NOTE CONF
So it's more helpful to think of this transition as
being a function that tells you where to go next.
NOTE CONF
So this is the function that says If I'm in
state one and I get a.
NOTE CONF
Then I move to state one.
Let's make this deterministic again.
NOTE CONF
So the transition function takes the current state and the
input letter and tells you where to go to next.
NOTE CONF
It's traditional to call it delta lowercase delta.
Um the reason for that is because in you're all
NOTE CONF
doing calculus right, or you're all about to do calculus,
I forget which you've all done calculus, and you're going
NOTE CONF
to do more of it whether you like it or
not.
NOTE CONF
Most of you don't.
I don't.
NOTE CONF
Um.
In calculus, delta is used to represent changes.
NOTE CONF
So the transition function tells you how the machine changes
when it sees an input.
NOTE CONF
And that's why we call it delta.
There is some initial state.
NOTE CONF
This is the boot up state.
And by fairly standard convention we'll use called q0 the
NOTE CONF
state the thing starts in.
And then there's another annoying notational piece of history.
NOTE CONF
Here we need to say which states are the good
states, the accepting states.
NOTE CONF
You might think that the obvious thing would be to
call that a for accepting, but historically these things were
NOTE CONF
actually called final states because they're where the machine ends
up in a good state.
NOTE CONF
And so again, there's a tradition that says the set
of accepting states is called F.
NOTE CONF
Of course, it doesn't matter in the slightest what symbols
you use, as long as you're consistent about it, but
NOTE CONF
you'll find it easier to follow the proofs and arguments
if you use the same symbols as everybody else.
NOTE CONF
And more importantly, we will find it easier to follow
your arguments if you use the same symbols as anybody
NOTE CONF
else.
Okay, so pure notation.
NOTE CONF
No intellectual content at all in this.
Apart from this bit about transition functions being functions.
NOTE CONF
Any questions about that.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Why am I introducing notation I'm introducing notation.
Because finite automata are too big and messy to write
NOTE CONF
down.
And anyway, we have been trying to teach you to
NOTE CONF
program by composing small bits of things together, writing small
functions, and composing them functions called other functions.
NOTE CONF
If I ask you to write down a finite automaton
to parse English, are you going to write down the
NOTE CONF
umpteen gazillion state automaton by some form of magical thinking?
You're not.
NOTE CONF
You're going to have some theory of what makes an
English sentence good, which is not an easy question, by
NOTE CONF
the way.
And you're going to try to build up a recogniser
NOTE CONF
for it out of smaller components that you understand more.
Um, I mean, English is probably not recognisable by a
NOTE CONF
finite state automaton, except insofar as there's a practical limit
on how long an English sentence can be.
NOTE CONF
Um, is there a limit on how long an English
sentence can be?
NOTE CONF
This is a digression or what are any other or
most other languages?
NOTE CONF
You all speak a lot of languages, but they all
have one thing in common, which is probably you don't
NOTE CONF
think there's a hard limit on the length of a
sentence?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
In a lifetime.
Okay, so that's an interesting point.
NOTE CONF
Um, you have to have be able to fit a
sentence into a lifetime.
NOTE CONF
Well, that's only if you require that one person has
to say the sentence.
NOTE CONF
There is a piece of music somewhere in London which
is designed to run for a thousand years.
NOTE CONF
No one person is going to listen to it, but
still.
NOTE CONF
Music.
Um, do you think in principle there's a limit on
NOTE CONF
the length of a sentence?
On the end?
NOTE CONF
I mean, you can do boring stuff, like just going
and so and so and so and so, but you
NOTE CONF
can do other things as well.
So those of you who are brought up English speaking,
NOTE CONF
you know, the house that Jack built.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, I now can't remember it, but it goes, uh,
this is the.
NOTE CONF
This is the dog that chased the cat, that caught
the mouse, that ate the cheese, that blah, blah, blah.
NOTE CONF
So you can extend that more or less indefinitely.
And it's a slightly interesting question as to whether natural
NOTE CONF
language does have a limit on the size of sentences.
So some people would say, well, if you can't speak
NOTE CONF
it in an hour or two, then it's not a
realistic sentence.
NOTE CONF
Um, you set a lifetime.
That's a bit more.
NOTE CONF
And some people would say that, well, that's just that's
just a practical consideration.
NOTE CONF
We can make sentences as long as you like.
And even more digressive, there are a few, frankly, batshit
NOTE CONF
crazy people who say that natural language has infinitely long
sentences.
NOTE CONF
And not just infinitely long, but trans, finitely humongous, infinitely
long sentences.
NOTE CONF
And if anybody wishes to know, I have a paper
about how crazy that is.
NOTE CONF
Um, that was a digression, because I'm trying not to
spend the entire lecture on tedious notation.
NOTE CONF
But this is the point, is that you want to
build reasonable sized automata that do useful things out of
NOTE CONF
reasonable sized automata, in the sense that you can understand
them because you can't understand a large automaton.
NOTE CONF
So we need a way of combining two automata to
build something that does something useful as a function of
NOTE CONF
the two bits, and that means we need notation.
That's the only reason.
NOTE CONF
Well, the only reason in this course that I'm introducing
the notation.
NOTE CONF
If you're thinking about a small automaton Then the easiest
way to think about it is the way that was
NOTE CONF
suggested for doing that little one that counts the number
of A's modulo three.
NOTE CONF
What are the states of an automaton?
That's where the memory of an automaton lives.
NOTE CONF
So your laptop has individual memory registers that store numbers
in them.
NOTE CONF
Finite automata are too dumb for that, but you can
use the states to store simple counters, like how many
NOTE CONF
A's you've seen so much of the time.
It's helpful to think about the states and then think
NOTE CONF
about the transitions, and this will let you build little
automata.
NOTE CONF
So here's a question.
The input alphabet is zero and one or odd and
NOTE CONF
even so zero and one.
Can you build that is can you draw a DFA
NOTE CONF
that accepts the strings, which have an even number of
zeros and an odd number of ones.
NOTE CONF
Never mind why we want to do that for the
moment, but can you just draw the automaton that does
NOTE CONF
that?
I'll let you think about that for a little bit,
NOTE CONF
but not too long.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
By not too long, I mean, could anybody see it
immediately?
NOTE CONF
Has anybody instantly produced a drawing or a drawing in
their head?
NOTE CONF
Not totally straightforward, is it?
Even though it's a very simple thing to ask.
NOTE CONF
So the way we can think about it in terms
of states is what information are we trying to track?
NOTE CONF
If we're trying to track whether there are an even
number of zeros and an odd number of ones, then
NOTE CONF
we need to keep track of whether the number of
zeros and the number of ones is even or odd.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So actually we only need to keep two bits of
NOTE CONF
information.
Have we seen an even or odd number of zeros?
NOTE CONF
And have we seen an even or odd number of
ones?
NOTE CONF
How much automaton do we need to track?
Two bits.
NOTE CONF
Well, in order to track one bit, we need two
states, because we have to have a state where the
NOTE CONF
bit is zero and a state where the bit is
one.
NOTE CONF
So we ought to be able to write down the
automaton with just four states For one bit.
NOTE CONF
We need two states.
For two bits we need four states for three bits,
NOTE CONF
we need eight states.
Remember this goes back to the very beginning about encodings.
NOTE CONF
So we ought to be able to do this with
a set of states that looks like this.
NOTE CONF
These are just labels I'm calling them these to make
them give them an obvious meaning.
NOTE CONF
Um, a number of zeros is even the number of
ones is even, the number of zeros is even, the
NOTE CONF
number of ones is odd.
The number of zeros is odd.
NOTE CONF
The number of ones is even.
The number of zeros is odd.
NOTE CONF
The number of ones is odd.
Um, so those states should be enough.
NOTE CONF
What's the initial state?
Well, at the beginning we have read nothing.
NOTE CONF
So we've read zero ones and zero zeros, which is
even bigger so, we start off in the state.
NOTE CONF
Even zero.
Even one.
NOTE CONF
What's the accepting state accepting set?
Well, we're looking for states where there are an even
NOTE CONF
number of zeros and an odd number of ones, by
definition, by what we intend to do.
NOTE CONF
That is that state.
So if we just draw out the states, we can
NOTE CONF
draw them in a nice little square like that.
Start there.
NOTE CONF
We want to end up there.
And these are bad states where we've seen the wrong
NOTE CONF
number of things.
Now all we have to do is draw the arrows
NOTE CONF
between them to do the right thing.
How does that work?
NOTE CONF
Well, it works like this.
Of course, if you see a one, then you need
NOTE CONF
to flip the one bit from even to odd.
Even to odd.
NOTE CONF
Or vice versa.
If you see a zero, then you need to flip
NOTE CONF
the zero bit from even to odd or odd to
even.
NOTE CONF
So that's a nice, simple diagram that we can draw
just by thinking about the states of the automaton.
NOTE CONF
Um, if we really want to write this out in
very formal stuff, then this is the set of states,
NOTE CONF
the q0, the initial state set of final states.
And this is the transition function written out as a
NOTE CONF
table, which is one way to write about it.
Um, that wasn't too bad because this was a very
NOTE CONF
simple thing.
But if you try to do this for anything marginally
NOTE CONF
more complicated than an even number of zeros and an
odd number of ones, you will find that it is
NOTE CONF
really quite hard.
And if even if you try to do this one
NOTE CONF
just by thinking, not thinking about states, but by thinking
about who I have an even number of zeros I
NOTE CONF
need to read.
Um, do I need to read a zero followed by
NOTE CONF
a one, followed by some more ones?
Do you like what you get into a mess?
NOTE CONF
And if you look at some of the stuff done
in the book, it will show you how painful it
NOTE CONF
is.
So thinking about states is quite a good way to
NOTE CONF
build very simple automata.
And that's actually how most of the small things that
NOTE CONF
one uses in programming language parsing or compilation written at
the most basic level.
NOTE CONF
Is there anything that strikes you about this automaton?
Is it just four states with some arrows between it
NOTE CONF
or.
Does it look as if it might have some kind
NOTE CONF
of structure that we could have used?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Take that away to think about.
We will come back to it next week, I think,
NOTE CONF
or possibly tomorrow depending on how things go.
But for the moment, what I've done is just give
NOTE CONF
you a way of thinking about building small automata where
you can see what the information being manipulated is, and
NOTE CONF
you can see how to encode that in terms of
states.
NOTE CONF
Here I is using states as bits.
I could use states as counters 012 as we did
NOTE CONF
with the previous example.
And you could do lots of other things to go
NOTE CONF
any further.
Then there's going to be more notation.
NOTE CONF
And I think we probably had enough notation.
And besides it's one minute two.
NOTE CONF
So any closing questions on the swathe of notation that
we've had today?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So do go and think about this diagram.
NOTE CONF
It's a sort of pretty square.
It has a bit of structure.
NOTE CONF
See if you can think about how you might exploit
that structure.
NOTE CONF
And also have a look at the book section on
this.
NOTE CONF
I don't know whether you're reliably doing the reading we
recommend.
NOTE CONF
I actually try to design things so that you don't
really have to do the reading, but it's probably useful.
NOTE CONF
In this case, it might be instructive.
Okay, so tomorrow we will introduce a little bit more
NOTE CONF
notation.
And then we will get on to building bigger automata
NOTE CONF
out of smaller automata, which is basically programming.
Okay.
NOTE CONF